# Lessons From Teaching

Last week, I created my first piece of choreography after regularly taking choreo classes for two years. On top of that, I got to share my first piece with Incognito Mode, Google's dance team for Silicon Valley's Best Dance Crew. I don't know who gets to teach a such a group of such skilled group of dancers for their first time both choreographing and teaching, but I guess: ME - I was so lucky to have that.

Because I've been so focused on taking choreography classes and improving "class" skills like retention, picture matching, and self-teaching by observing the teacher, it wasn't until only a few months ago that I realized that there are a lot of dance skills that can't be practiced or taught in class. For example, I didn't discover freestyling until a few months ago. As a choreo head, I didn't see any value in freestyle, because I had thought that the only difference between them was that a dancer had less time to think in freestyle. Now, I understand that choreography and freestyle are completely different movements - it's the difference between telling a story and materializing experimental feels. Learning about freestyle made me shift my taxonomization of dance and correct the misbelief that choreography would always be better dancing than freestyle. After this opportunity to choreograph and to teach, I've been feeling a similar growth in the understanding of dance, but multiplied in scope, and condensed in time. I learned more than a few lessons, but wanted to share some notable ones from my most recent experience with Incognito Mode, as well the past summer:

1. The pictures and pathways of a dance is not the sole, or even most important, thing.
I now study choreography videos differently from before, and need to watch choreography more than once, even though ironically I'm probably picking up more details in a single runthrough than I did before. I used to mostly watch with a focus on understanding the mechanics of the movement: what was the pathway of the arms? Where were the weight changes in the footing? But now that I've started to think about dance from the side which creates it, I've also started to pay very close attention to the rhythms that the choreographer chooses to emphasize: when do their movements follow the lyrics? When do they switch over to the beats? How often do they weave between the two? How do they find a balance between lyrics and beats to keep the musicality of the choreography interesting, even when the musicality of the song is not? (Sorry, a dig at pop music.) Then, on another runthrough, I'll watch the choreography for performance. I learned of its importance the hard way through performing for FPX and dancing for the video shoot in Japan. I noticed a while ago that even though focus is rarely explicitly called out by the teacher, it can often be inferred from what the rest of the body is set to be doing. Analogously, facials can be inferred from the quality of the music that corresponds to the move.

2. A choreographer's intention may be different from their execution.
When teaching, define pictures whenever you can. There was a lot of pictures and angles I hit, especially with arms, where I thought it was quite obvious where the picture was set. However, even for one of the pictures I did point out, some people were still missing the arm angle. This goes for levels as well. I was more conscious of pointing these details out because I knew I wasn't executing them with the intention I wanted, and it showed. In the videos of the team running it, it was very clear which levels I had specifically defined, and which ones I had left for everyone to read from my execution. I guess the bigger idea here is that the way that the choreographer performs a piece is not necessarily how it is intended to be done. If a choreographer is good at executing, they can get away with explaining less because they can just explain it with their body. But, for someone on my level, it is very important to state my intention.

3. There's a difference between teaching dance technique and teaching choreography.
I've now started to think of the latter, essentially what I did in the Incognito Mode rehearsal, as sharing. I respect studio teachers even more now: I've come to realize that not only do they have a limited amount of time to make sure people know what the combo is, and how it fits with the music, but they also have to teach the technique and mechanics of each move. My intention during rehearsal the entire time was focused on the former goal, both because I was concerned about the time limit, and because I trust these dancers a lot. I had assumed that technique-wise or movement-wise, there wasn't much for me to offer. However, after I re-watched the videos we took at the end of rehearsal, I realized that there were movements that feel better on my body, that even if people had seen before, I could have helped break down. Specifically for this choreo, I could have explained body opposition more. On the other side of the pancake, I think it was good that I explained the technique in glides and how to make the pas de bourree look bigger.

4. Last but not least: people are super supportive.
Maybe I was really extra in displaying what a big deal for me it was to choreograph and teach for the first time, but from friends who weren't dancers to people on the team, everyone was eager in re-assuring my capabilities both before and after I shared the piece. The team seemed very genuine when they told me they enjoyed my choreography and my class. I want to make it explicit that I feel the love, and I'm grateful for the support and positivity of dancers.
